[Guest 1]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: Are you a different person when you are in a
[Amit Varma]: crowd than when you are alone?
[Amit Varma]: I know I am.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes you adjust your behavior to fit the social norms expected in a given situation.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes you are anxious either to fit in or to impress.
[Amit Varma]: You have a performative self, perhaps even different performative selves for different
[Amit Varma]: situations.
[Amit Varma]: But maybe being in a crowd doesn't change you as much as it amplifies some part of your
[Amit Varma]: character.
[Amit Varma]: In a cricket stadium, you cheer louder for your favorite team and feel deeper emotion.
[Amit Varma]: And maybe when you are part of an angry crowd, baying for the blood of someone who is not
[Amit Varma]: from these parts or who is not part of your community, your baser instincts get aroused
[Amit Varma]: and you do things you would never do if you were alone.
[Amit Varma]: You hit somebody, you hurt somebody, maybe you kill somebody.
[Amit Varma]: Are you a different person when you are in a crowd than when you are alone?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Last week, the Supreme Court asked the Indian Parliament to enact a new law against lynching.
[Amit Varma]: I wrote a post in the group blog I edit, Pragati Express at express.thinkpragati.com, arguing
[Amit Varma]: that this was just virtue signaling by the court.
[Amit Varma]: There were already laws against beating people, against killing people.
[Amit Varma]: There are even laws that can be used to prosecute people who spread fake news on WhatsApp.
[Amit Varma]: A new law would not cover anything that isn't already covered.
[Amit Varma]: Our problem is not that we don't have enough laws, but that we don't have the rule of law.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes the state doesn't have the will to prosecute certain crimes.
[Amit Varma]: And even when it does, often when it does, there is not enough state capacity to prosecute
[Amit Varma]: them.
[Amit Varma]: Creating a new law is not going to solve these problems.
[Amit Varma]: Anyway, the topic for today's show is crowd violence in India.
[Amit Varma]: And my guests today are Madhav Chandravarkar and Alok Prasanna Kumar.
[Amit Varma]: Madhav is a legal expert at the Takshashila Institution, and Alok runs the Bangalore branch
[Amit Varma]: of Vidhi, a legal think tank.
[Amit Varma]: They're working on a project together that involves lynching and crowd violence.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm delighted that they agreed to chat with me about it.
[Amit Varma]: But before I cut to the conversation that we had, a small commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If this happens to be the only podcast you listen to, well, you need to listen to some
[Amit Varma]: more.
[Amit Varma]: So check out the ones from IVM Podcasts who co-produced this show with me.
[Amit Varma]: Go to ivmpodcasts.com or download the IVM app and you'll find a host of great Indian
[Amit Varma]: podcasts that cover every subject you could think of.
[Amit Varma]: From the magazine I edit, Pragati, at thinkpragati.com, there is the Pragati podcast hosted by Hamsini
[Amit Varma]: Hariharan and Pawan Srinath.
[Amit Varma]: There is a brilliant Hindi podcast, Huliyabazi, hosted by Pranay Koteswamy and Sourabh Chandra.
[Amit Varma]: And apart from these policy podcasts, IVM has shows that cover music, films, finance,
[Amit Varma]: sports, sci-fi, tech, and the LGBT community, all under one roof, or rather, all in one
[Amit Varma]: app.
[Amit Varma]: So download the IVM podcast app today.
[Amit Varma]: Alok Madhav, welcome to the show.
[Guest 1]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Nice to be here.
[Amit Varma]: So the Supreme Court just came out with this suggestion today to the parliament that it
[Amit Varma]: enact a law to stop lynching, to deal with lynching.
[Amit Varma]: And like I wrote a comment on Pragati Express about how that's just virtue signaling because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, laws already exist that deal with beatings, with killings, with spreading fake
[Amit Varma]: news if it comes to that.
[Amit Varma]: And Alok, I know you have a slightly deeper take on what the Supreme Court fundamentally
[Amit Varma]: gets wrong, even in understanding this problem of crowd violence.
[Amit Varma]: Can you elaborate on that a bit?
[Guest 2]: Yeah.
[Guest 2]: And I think you said it best, that virtue signaling.
[Guest 2]: And if you see the judgment itself, they don't seem to have any idea of what they're talking
[Guest 2]: about.
[Guest 2]: Because this petition, then we'll go to go back to when this petition was filed in 2016,
[Guest 2]: was filed in a particular context.
[Guest 2]: You've had these instances of Muslims, of Dalits being attacked and being killed over
[Guest 2]: rumors that they were handling beef or possessing beef or transporting cows or some such kind
[Guest 2]: of a thing.
[Guest 2]: And more often than not, the attackers were largely upper caste Hindus or dominant communities
[Guest 2]: in that area.
[Guest 2]: Nowhere in the judgment of the Supreme Court go into this at all.
[Guest 2]: It does not discuss even one incident of what it means by lynching, right?
[Guest 2]: It is talking about this issue in a totally acontextual way, that is, you know, just some
[Guest 2]: accidental thing that happens without any basis for it, without any historical or sociological
[Guest 2]: context.
[Guest 2]: But we know lynching is not something that happens just like that, or just something
[Guest 2]: that happens because the police aren't doing their job properly or the police haven't done
[Guest 2]: their duties properly.
[Guest 2]: It happens in a particular historical and sociological concept.
[Guest 2]: Even the term lynching, academically and sociologically, is used in a particular historical context.
[Guest 2]: Now, if we go back to the late 19th century and early 20th century, the incidents happened
[Guest 2]: largely in the southern part of the US, in the former slaveholding states, where after
[Guest 2]: the Civil War, when the North stops imposing the reconstruction, so to speak, where they
[Guest 2]: try to ensure that African Americans are treated more equally and the laws aren't unequal towards
[Guest 2]: them, the white community tries to reimpose some level of dominance over the African American
[Guest 2]: community there.
[Guest 2]: And therefore, you find that largely African American men are victims of lynching.
[Guest 2]: These are all public events.
[Guest 2]: Nobody is suddenly picking up someone and trying to kill them.
[Guest 2]: There are even postcards made of these events, postcards are made and people circulate them
[Guest 2]: freely to say, look what we did.
[Guest 2]: Nobody's doing this secretly or in private.
[Guest 2]: Yes, of course, you have the Klu Klux Klan and all of those, but the instances of lynching
[Guest 2]: take place in a very public manner.
[Guest 2]: There is what we would now call a performative aspect to say, we are happy we did this and
[Guest 2]: we are sending out a message that this is what we will do if you dare to cross racial
[Guest 2]: boundaries.
[Guest 2]: So you have these fears raised, I mean, like how we have beef as a fear.
[Guest 2]: Then the fear was interracial mixing or interracial marriage.
[Guest 2]: Look, black men can't resist themselves and they see white women and so on.
[Guest 2]: So you have these fears raised that we need to somehow control black men and therefore
[Guest 2]: that is the kind of fear that is created and that sort of leads to these kind of instance
[Guest 2]: of lynching.
[Guest 2]: It is not some totally a contextual set of killings which take place.
[Guest 2]: None of that is informed in the way in which the Supreme Court approaches the issue.
[Guest 2]: They quote Mark Twain, they quote Benjamin Franklin, but they don't actually quote any
[Guest 2]: of the historical studies or the solid data driven work which has gone into understanding
[Guest 2]: the phenomenon.
[Guest 2]: Forget about the US.
[Guest 2]: Even in India, there's tons and tons of work which has gone into understanding and examining
[Guest 2]: each of these events, going in depth into why these happened and what has happened.
[Guest 2]: And that also results in some of the directions that the Supreme Court passes.
[Guest 2]: The way they say, oh, you know, if the police just take care and do this and they appoint
[Guest 2]: a nodal officer and make sure you file the FIR and fast track court, everything will
[Guest 2]: be fine.
[Guest 2]: The silly thing is exactly all of this, in fact, happened in Jharkhand.
[Guest 2]: In Jharkhand, over the killing of one cattle trader, Alimuddin Ansari, who was actually
[Guest 2]: killed by the upper caste Hindus in that area for quote unquote transporting beef, the state
[Guest 2]: government did quickly file the FIR, did arrest 11 people.
[Guest 2]: There was a fast track trial in one year.
[Guest 2]: They were all convicted, except the high court gave bail to eight of them almost soon after
[Guest 2]: because the trial was so shoddily conducted, because the evidence was not presented properly,
[Guest 2]: because the rules of procedure were not followed at all.
[Guest 2]: So it's all very well to say all of this, but you're just only ensuring that even justice
[Guest 2]: is not done properly.
[Guest 2]: And to compound matters, you have a Jain Sinha who goes there and garlands these eight people
[Guest 2]: saying, wow, rule of law one, right?
[Guest 2]: So the Supreme Court is completely mistaken about what it is talking about at all.
[Guest 2]: It has so completely failed to even understand the underlying sociological phenomenon, which
[Guest 2]: leads to things like lynching, that when it gives these directions, when it gives these
[Guest 2]: kinds of guidelines or whatever you want to call it, it has no clue how they will be effective.
[Guest 2]: And making a new law will have no impact at all.
[Guest 2]: I mean, deterrence theory has been discredited for years and years now, and that it's kind
[Guest 2]: of ridiculous that judges still think that if you have a new law, which deals exclusively
[Guest 2]: with this, it will be sufficiently harsh.
[Guest 2]: I mean, why should I blame judges?
[Guest 2]: Even some of the well-meaning people seem to think that if you have a new law exclusively
[Guest 2]: dealing with lynching, that will handle the issue.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I'm not going to blame the judges alone in this.
[Guest 2]: So which is why I don't think people really understand what the phenomenon going on here.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a couple of clarificatory questions here.
[Amit Varma]: The first is to do with the terminology, that where did lynching come from and the judges
[Amit Varma]: don't understand it.
[Amit Varma]: So let's say we've seen two kinds of organized violence in recent times, which have been
[Amit Varma]: loosely the term lynching has been used for them.
[Amit Varma]: One is, of course, for communal purposes, like people transporting beef and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, generally, it'll be a Hindu mob getting together and beating up or killing
[Amit Varma]: a Muslim or a Dalit.
[Amit Varma]: And as you pointed out, with the post-civil war lynchings, the 19th century lynchings,
[Amit Varma]: there's a certain amount of pride in the people carrying them out.
[Amit Varma]: The other kind is when these fake rumors are spread through WhatsApp that strangers abducting
[Amit Varma]: children.
[Amit Varma]: And for that, random strangers who just don't happen to be from the area are lynched.
[Amit Varma]: And there's not necessarily a communal angle to it, nor is it necessarily a matter of communal
[Amit Varma]: pride, community pride.
[Amit Varma]: So would you then say that the second kind of mob violence is not really lynching?
[Guest 2]: It's not really lynching at all.
[Guest 2]: And I think we're making a huge mistake, in fact, by calling it lynching at all.
[Guest 2]: I actually prefer to use a vaguest term, which is killings.
[Guest 2]: The reason why I say this is so India Spend has this extraordinarily detailed spreadsheet
[Guest 2]: that they keep updating on a daily basis.
[Guest 2]: It's on their website.
[Guest 2]: And if you actually go through it, there are about 68 events they've kept track of starting
[Guest 2]: from February of this year.
[Guest 2]: That's the earliest event, if I'm not mistaken, that they have cataloged.
[Guest 2]: They could be earlier dating back to and they're focused specifically on child lifter rumors
[Guest 2]: being spread on WhatsApp and so on.
[Guest 2]: These instances are everywhere from Gujarat to Tamil Nadu to, you know, in Northeast as
[Guest 2]: well in Assam, if I'm not mistaken.
[Guest 2]: So they're spread across the country.
[Guest 2]: Interestingly, there is a mix of urban and rural areas.
[Guest 2]: You have events in instances in Ahmedabad, you have instances in Bangalore, you have
[Guest 2]: instances in tribal hamlets, you have instances in Malegaon, you have instances across the
[Guest 2]: country.
[Guest 2]: The common factor, as you can see, is that one, as you pointed out, it's just a stranger.
[Guest 2]: The only thing common is they don't know who that person is, right?
[Guest 2]: They can't identify who that person is.
[Guest 2]: So you've had Muslim mobs attacking Hindus.
[Guest 2]: You have had Hindu mobs attacking Muslims.
[Guest 2]: You have had upper caste mobs attacking lower caste.
[Guest 2]: You've had lower caste mobs attacking upper castes.
[Guest 2]: You have had tribals attacking non-tribals.
[Guest 2]: You have had people of not well-off attacking equally non-well-off people.
[Guest 2]: For instance, in Bangalore, it was actually a Tamil majority area, which is not one of
[Guest 2]: the well-off areas in Bangalore.
[Guest 2]: The man who was attacked was a Rajasthani speaker, right?
[Guest 2]: So somebody who didn't speak, forget about Kannada, didn't speak Tamil, right?
[Guest 2]: So which is why you can't even use that whole thing about some level of social control or
[Guest 2]: some level of context there.
[Guest 2]: It's just that this was somebody that just caused a mild level of panic simply by being
[Guest 2]: a stranger.
[Guest 2]: So you can't find any common pattern to describe lynching as we would understand it commonly.
[Guest 2]: The second thing is that the communities themselves where this is happening seem to be underprivileged
[Guest 2]: communities by and large.
[Guest 2]: You're not talking about, say, dominant castes.
[Guest 2]: Even say, for instance, dominant castes in terms of rural areas, those who enjoy some
[Guest 2]: privilege in terms of hierarchy and so on.
[Guest 2]: They are communities who don't seem to have that level of access to state resources.
[Guest 2]: Nobody here in this community can, for instance, or for instance, actually thought of calling
[Guest 2]: their local corporator or police officer and saying, hey, I heard these rumors, are they
[Guest 2]: true?
[Guest 2]: Or can you do something about it?
[Guest 2]: Or do you think you can ask the cops to increase patrolling?
[Guest 2]: You can imagine if this is a community which had good connections, if the local corporator
[Guest 2]: was from them, or if the local police was somebody that they knew, they'd be able to
[Guest 2]: get something done about it, right?
[Guest 2]: Or at least visibly done something.
[Amit Varma]: So what you're referring to where the killers aren't from a dominant community, you're talking
[Guest 2]: about the second kind of killings as it were.
[Guest 2]: Yes, second kind of killings.
[Guest 2]: Not the first kind where they are definitely the dominant community.
[Guest 2]: Exactly.
[Guest 2]: Because if you see all the lynchings, the lynchings proper, you will find that the police
[Guest 2]: either have a blasé attitude towards the whole thing.
[Guest 2]: You would have seen the recent pictures from Uttar Pradesh where the police are generally
[Guest 2]: tagging along as they drag the body of the victim.
[Guest 2]: You will find in many cases the police hand over the person that they catch or they come
[Guest 2]: fairly late onto the scene and file FIRs against the victim, right?
[Guest 2]: So there is some sort of a tacit or even active support of the killers from the police machinery.
[Guest 2]: Whereas in terms of the childlifter killings, we find the police themselves being attacked
[Guest 2]: in so many cases.
[Guest 2]: When the police reach to rescue the people being beaten up, they get attacked because
[Guest 2]: the crowd is in a total state of panic.
[Guest 2]: They don't know if the police are in disguise or actually the police.
[Guest 2]: They don't enjoy any support.
[Guest 2]: And they have such a level of mistrust with the police that they sometimes end up attacking
[Guest 2]: them.
[Guest 2]: So even the police can't control them.
[Guest 2]: So there is that one very key difference that is very noticeable if you just examine the
[Guest 2]: reports.
[Guest 2]: I mean, there still needs to be more studies done as to how the people reacted when the
[Guest 2]: police came.
[Guest 2]: And when you read their FIRs, you'll get more details.
[Guest 2]: But clearly it is not as if the police knew what was happening or the police knew whom
[Guest 2]: to speak to and control the situation.
[Guest 2]: Repeatedly, one very detailed instance comes from Malegaon, for instance, where the police
[Guest 2]: in charge try to speak to the elders to say, please calm the mob down.
[Guest 2]: And they say, we don't have any control.
[Guest 2]: People have just gone crazy about the situation.
[Guest 2]: They think these five people whom they don't know are childlifters, which is crazy because
[Guest 2]: the five people in question are everything from a child of five years old to somebody
[Guest 2]: 40, 50 years old.
[Guest 2]: So which is why there is a certain level of irrationality which has gripped the mob.
[Guest 2]: It is not a calculated effort to do something to show that we are asserting control or any
[Guest 2]: such thing.
[Guest 2]: So, which is why this phenomenon needs to be tackled very differently.
[Guest 2]: Some police agencies are getting this.
[Guest 2]: They are understanding that, OK, this is a failure on our part.
[Guest 2]: We haven't reached out to these communities.
[Guest 2]: So which is why the first response is to say, let's reach out.
[Guest 2]: I mean, it's apart from just saying, don't believe in rumours, going out to the communities
[Guest 2]: to say, we are here.
[Amit Varma]: Please call us.
[Guest 2]: They are proactively trying to say that these are our numbers.
[Guest 2]: Call us.
[Guest 2]: In some cases, this has I mean, they've messed up very badly, for instance, in Tripura, instead
[Guest 2]: of the police going out, the state government, in a very stupid move, sent somebody from
[Guest 2]: this Agartala to a village to say, please tell everybody to not to panic, except that
[Guest 2]: poor fellow got killed.
[Guest 2]: They thought he was a childlifter because he wasn't wearing a uniform.
[Guest 2]: He was somebody from the state government.
[Guest 2]: The state tried to deal with it as a pure PR exercise.
[Guest 2]: The police didn't accompany him.
[Guest 2]: There was no official stamp about him.
[Guest 2]: So he got killed in the process.
[Guest 2]: So there is a right way to do this and a wrong way to do this.
[Guest 2]: The right way to do this is to treat it as a look, there is a failure of the police machinery
[Guest 2]: here.
[Guest 2]: There's a breakdown of trust between communities and the police.
[Guest 2]: But there is one deeper question to go to.
[Guest 2]: Why are people believing these rumours?
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: It's not just WhatsApp which is causing it.
[Guest 2]: We had, you know, 20 years ago, people believing rumours about Ganesha's drinking milk, pre
[Guest 2]: WhatsApp, pre internet.
[Guest 2]: We found instances of similar killings in rural West Bengal, about 30 or 40 years ago.
[Guest 2]: So rumours do spread, right?
[Guest 2]: Rumours are there all around us all the time.
[Guest 2]: Why is it that they suddenly get acted upon at certain points of time?
[Guest 2]: This is an open question.
[Guest 2]: And I think this is really the issue which needs to be looked at and researched.
[Guest 2]: And I don't say I have an immediate answer for this.
[Guest 2]: One potential answer is that these are communities which feel some level of anxiety about them,
[Guest 2]: that they feel they're under threat in some way, that could be an economic threat, could
[Guest 2]: be that they feel that they've been going to be displaced, or could be that they genuinely
[Guest 2]: feel that there have been instances of child lifting.
[Guest 2]: But maybe they feel that there is a genuine breakdown of relationship between the police
[Guest 2]: and this.
[Guest 2]: And so there needs to be more deeper questions asked.
[Guest 2]: And we should not stop at just calling it lynching.
[Guest 2]: We should not just stop at saying it's WhatsApp fault.
[Guest 2]: And we shouldn't just stop at saying it's the police's fault.
[Guest 2]: So that's that's sort of why I want to make this conceptual difference.
[Amit Varma]: So Madhav, I want to turn to you.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there are really two interesting questions here.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, one is what Alok just raised about why do people believe such rumours and not
[Amit Varma]: just why do people believe such rumours, but rumours are pretty ubiquitous.
[Amit Varma]: And why at certain times, do certain rumours gain currencies, which is a large open question.
[Amit Varma]: But the other open question, which I know you've spent a lot of time thinking about,
[Amit Varma]: is why do crowds get roused to violence, when very often crowds are composed of individuals
[Amit Varma]: who by themselves would not have that proclivity for violence, but when a crowd comes together,
[Amit Varma]: it seems to behave entirely like a beast of its own.
[Amit Varma]: So are these two kinds of crowd violence related?
[Amit Varma]: Is there a common theory that kind of explains them?
[Guest 1]: There's a long history in terms of the pathology of of crowd violence.
[Guest 1]: On the first question, I think whatever theories we have in terms of cognitive biases and why
[Guest 1]: people would believe easily disprovable information, I think there's a fair amount of research
[Guest 1]: that I think has been discussed in this podcast before, so I won't go too much into that.
[Guest 1]: But the history of crowd pathology is quite bizarre, because I think most people have
[Guest 1]: a very poor understanding of how crowd violence works.
[Guest 1]: They seem to think that when someone is in a crowd, it's sort of the so-called mob mentality
[Guest 1]: takes over and you sort of reduce to a primal, sort of feral, violent sort of personality.
[Guest 1]: But that's not actually true.
[Guest 1]: And that theory actually comes from this French polymath called Gustave Le Bon.
[Guest 1]: I think he published his paper in 1895 in the specific context of the Third French Revolution.
[Guest 1]: And if you look at the actual sort of empirical evidence that we have now, the violence that
[Guest 1]: was happening in Paris at the time was the opposite of a mindless mob.
[Guest 1]: It was very structured.
[Guest 1]: They had very clear goals and motivations.
[Guest 1]: And that theory of Le Bon is sort of proven to be very sticky to this extent that even
[Guest 1]: when it has been disproved, it has set the parameters of the discussion.
[Guest 1]: So I think in late 1920s, an American FH Allport came and basically argued the opposite that
[Guest 1]: instead of crowds making someone revert to some primal self, the people who commit violence
[Guest 1]: in crowds are just bad eggs.
[Guest 1]: So they're just bad people.
[Guest 1]: So they bring in their baggage with them, and that's why the violence happens.
[Guest 1]: And that is also empirically unsound.
[Guest 1]: And what has happened since is that a lot of people have sort of merged these two theories
[Guest 1]: in a very toxic way.
[Guest 1]: They sort of argue that the Le Bon majority of the crowd is this hapless, mindless, very
[Guest 1]: easily influenced sort of section.
[Guest 1]: And they get turned over, hijacked or flipped, the lot of police terminology sort of used
[Guest 1]: to describe, by an Allportian minority.
[Guest 1]: And this is the prevalent sort of understanding of mob violence, the so-called agent provocateur.
[Amit Varma]: So basically the bad eggs make the sheep do terrible things.
[Guest 1]: Exactly.
[Guest 1]: And the biggest problem with this understanding of crowd pathology is that nowhere is the
[Guest 1]: role of the police factored in.
[Guest 1]: So in the sort of late 70s and early 80s, there was this guy called Stephen Riker, who
[Guest 1]: basically came up, and he comes at the end of a lot of intellectual thought.
[Guest 1]: So he has an excellent paper that I would recommend reading called The Psychology of
[Guest 1]: Crowd Dynamics.
[Guest 1]: And basically he argues for what he calls the elaborated social identity model, where
[Guest 1]: the basic argument is that everyone has a very unique individual sense of identity.
[Guest 1]: But what happens when you get thrown into crowds, and by crowds, Riker is not just talking
[Guest 1]: about, you know, mobs in the streets, he's talking about any collectivization.
[Guest 1]: What happens is that you shift from that individual identity to the collective identity, and you
[Guest 1]: sort of almost, you start, because of social pressure and a lot of other factors, start
[Guest 1]: subscribing to the norms and behaviors of that group.
[Guest 1]: And it is, I think, in that context that the fake news and the WhatsApp and the Twitter
[Guest 1]: sort of come into play.
[Guest 1]: In fact, to me, Twitter is more dangerous than WhatsApp news, because Twitter is the
[Guest 1]: kindling and WhatsApp news is simply the spark.
[Guest 1]: And a spark without kindling is harmless.
[Guest 1]: And it's the discussions on Twitter, as well as maybe some of the actions or rather non-actions
[Guest 1]: of sort of influence setters, like political leaders or actors or whoever it may be, that
[Guest 1]: sort of influence these norms and change the accepted modes of behavior.
[Guest 1]: So a lot of what Alok was talking about in terms of upper-caste Hindu men violently securing
[Guest 1]: a social order of some kind is witnessed every day by all of us on Twitter.
[Guest 1]: And I think that is the more sort of, it's also the more difficult nut to crack.
[Guest 1]: How do you change social norms, WhatsApp news is fake news.
[Guest 1]: It's becomes this, it's still a very nebulous idea, but at least in people's conceptions,
[Guest 1]: there's a very easy solution.
[Guest 1]: You stop it, as opposed to changing norms.
[Guest 1]: How do you even begin to go about such a task?
[Amit Varma]: So just to paraphrase you and correct me if I did it wrong, what you're essentially saying
[Amit Varma]: is that there is an inherent tribalism in us, which is amplified by Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: And then what happens on WhatsApp subsequently is just an expression of that.
[Guest 1]: No, I wouldn't say there's an inherent tribalism.
[Guest 1]: You don't feel the tribalism is inherent?
[Guest 1]: Perhaps I'm a little uncomfortable with the connotations of the word tribalism.
[Guest 1]: I think there is some, there's some connotations of reverting to a primitive.
[Amit Varma]: But in a sense, I'd say that all of us are hardwired to think in terms of in-groups and
[Amit Varma]: the other.
[Amit Varma]: And culture is at the end, the whole enlightenment project is essentially about fighting our
[Amit Varma]: hardwiring in many of these primitive ways.
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: So that's actually the whole concept of the in-group and the other, something that features
[Guest 1]: very much into the ESIM model of crowd policing.
[Guest 1]: Because what they say is that if you have a peaceful protest, and which the police think
[Guest 1]: that, okay, it's a bunch of peaceful protesters, but you know, it's the Lebanon majority, which
[Guest 1]: may get hijacked.
[Guest 1]: So the police treat them as a homogenous danger, even if they understand that the crowd in
[Guest 1]: front of them is a heterogeneous.
[Guest 1]: And what that encourages is escalated policing.
[Guest 1]: So your lathi charges, water cannons, rubber bullets, whatever it may be.
[Guest 1]: And what that does is that it, one, it takes a majority of the crowds, which Riker calls
[Guest 1]: moderates.
[Guest 1]: And the moderates basically go, I am doing some legitimate activity, like enjoying a
[Guest 1]: football game, or politically protesting.
[Guest 1]: I am being prevented from this legitimate activity by this extremely violent police,
[Guest 1]: which then casts the police as illegitimate.
[Guest 1]: And what it automatically does is because the police is treating that entire crowd homogenously,
[Guest 1]: they start to identify with the slightly more radical elements that may be there in the
[Guest 1]: crowd saying that, yeah, you know, these guys are the enemy, see what they're doing.
[Guest 1]: And then that sort of, that interplay between the various identities and beliefs and the
[Guest 1]: reactions to the actions of each of those collective groupings, is then what drives that crowd
[Guest 1]: towards violence.
[Amit Varma]: So essentially, you're saying the crowd is probably not radical to start with, but because
[Amit Varma]: the police preemptively treats it as radical because of the Le Bon theory that a few small
[Amit Varma]: eggs will make them all go bad, so treat them all the same, actually radicalizes them and
[Guest 1]: drives them towards violence.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, which is my number one problem with the Supreme Court's judgment, because they're
[Guest 1]: basically saying more of the same and not with any nuance.
[Amit Varma]: So if it's not more of the same, for example, like I figured out what you mean by the same,
[Amit Varma]: which is the whole Le Bon model of crowd violence and therefore don't, so what would you do
[Amit Varma]: differently?
[Guest 1]: Like, how should the police?
[Guest 1]: So what the ESIM or a lot of people within that sort of theory say is exactly what Alok
[Guest 1]: was saying, which is about community management, community participation.
[Guest 1]: It's I think a drowning voice in the Black Lives Matter movement that what you need to
[Guest 1]: do is actually have more interaction to build back the trust, because what is there right
[Guest 1]: now is a fundamental distrust of the police.
[Guest 1]: And so that will only happen through not only whatever the thousand police reforms that
[Guest 1]: need to be done in the country, but even if those happen, that the trust will only be
[Guest 1]: brought back by continuous engagement.
[Amit Varma]: But isn't this a sort of dual problem there?
[Amit Varma]: At number one, we don't have state capacity in the sense that we simply don't have enough
[Amit Varma]: police and they're trained very badly.
[Amit Varma]: And this is too much of a ask.
[Amit Varma]: And beyond the state capacity, there's also the problem of the will, like Alok correctly
[Amit Varma]: pointed out in many of the communal kind of communal lynchings, which is appropriate to
[Amit Varma]: call them lynchings.
[Amit Varma]: The police are actually on the side of the mob, in a sense.
[Guest 1]: So which is what makes us inherently sceptical of any solution that says more policing, right?
[Guest 1]: So by policing, I mean, specifically the police going out on streets with the lathis or the
[Guest 1]: guns or whatever violent forms, but or even arrests or detentions.
[Guest 1]: But I am happy with sort of nonviolent, more sort of communicative participatory forms
[Guest 1]: of policing like Alok was talking about.
[Guest 1]: I don't see as much of danger over there.
[Guest 2]: So just to build on that a little bit, again, each problem requires its own set of solutions.
[Guest 2]: And while we're talking about how to manage these kinds of WhatsApp rumor based killings,
[Guest 2]: what this requires is for the police to go back, build its trust with the communities.
[Guest 2]: I mean, of course, the killings need to be handled as through the criminal justice system,
[Guest 2]: you have to bring the perpetrators to justice, all of that has to happen.
[Guest 2]: But the police need to go back to the communities.
[Guest 2]: They can't just militarize, shut down the places, increase police presence and think
[Guest 2]: that the problem will go away.
[Guest 2]: That will only cause more panic.
[Guest 2]: It'll make people believe that, you know, we are now being punished for what we think
[Amit Varma]: we were trying to defend our community kind of stuff.
[Amit Varma]: So it's part of the problem in this kind of, for example, rumor fueled killings, that the
[Amit Varma]: people at large, especially the kind of marginalized people you say are usually the perpetrators,
[Amit Varma]: don't have faith in the rule of law to begin with.
[Amit Varma]: So when they hear about child abductions in the area, they think that, damn, we got to
[Amit Varma]: take this into our own hands.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, I think that is, that is, I think, at the core of this, right?
[Guest 2]: I think at the core of it, it is that they just don't feel we can reach out to the police
[Guest 2]: that we don't think action will be taken that even if we go there, right, nobody's going
[Guest 2]: to listen to us.
[Guest 2]: I mean, just a slight digression.
[Guest 2]: One of the things that keep coming up when you sort of read people's assessment of a
[Guest 2]: government, especially across North India and in rural, a lot of rural belts, is our
[Guest 2]: Sunwai, right?
[Guest 2]: They would think that if a government listens to us, it's good enough.
[Guest 2]: They don't, even if outcomes may be good or bad, they judge a government on how well they
[Guest 2]: listen.
[Guest 2]: And the fact that you can't expect, even if you can't even expect a hearing from this
[Guest 2]: police, or you can't even expect to go be heard by this police, suggests that such a
[Guest 2]: total level of breakdown there.
[Guest 2]: And in inevitably innumerable number of cases, you will keep finding that you can't even
[Guest 2]: expect the police to take down your complaint if you don't go with your local MLA or local
[Guest 2]: corporate or local panchayat officer.
[Guest 2]: And that is for the people who have access to these level of, you know, government functionaries.
[Guest 2]: If you're a community or if you're a group of people who have no access to these functionaries,
[Guest 2]: then you feel even more cut off from the rule of law seems like nothing.
[Guest 2]: I mean, it's just a concept that has no meaning at all for you, right?
[Guest 2]: So which is why you have to first start by enforcing that, yes, we will respond, we will
[Guest 2]: listen to you.
[Guest 2]: We are here to respond to you and we are here to understand what you don't take the law
[Guest 2]: into your own hands.
[Guest 2]: That is where that can have a sort of meaningful response in at least preventing future outbreaks
[Guest 2]: and preventing more people from taking the law into their own hands in that sense.
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: And there are in terms of the impact of like the fundamental breakdown of rule of law that
[Guest 1]: we currently have in our country.
[Guest 1]: It's I think dual fold, one is the sense that the social orders that we currently live by
[Guest 1]: are no longer legitimate.
[Guest 1]: So the people feel that they are no longer need to be bound by them.
[Guest 1]: And that is more a question of a normative position of whether they should engage in
[Guest 1]: a certain behavior or not.
[Guest 1]: And the other is just a simple metric of power, they feel they can get away with it.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So let me let me try to sort of summarize what I've learned from you guys about these
[Amit Varma]: two different kinds of violence, which is very clear to me in order to explain it, that
[Amit Varma]: the lynchings that happen over, say, eating beef and so on are fundamentally just in every
[Amit Varma]: possible way different from the kind of killings which happen over WhatsApp rumors.
[Amit Varma]: So let me try and summarize it and tell me if you have something to add to that.
[Amit Varma]: What's happening in the case of the WhatsApp rumors is that they are, let's leave aside
[Amit Varma]: the question of why people have a proclivity to believe these kinds of rumors, because
[Amit Varma]: we are a species that after all feeds on narrative, we we make sense of the world through stories.
[Amit Varma]: So you know what the precise mechanism of these rumors working is a different matter.
[Amit Varma]: But these are generally committed by marginalized groups who recognize that there is no rule
[Amit Varma]: of law in this country, which is something I've always said, the rule of law, if it exists,
[Amit Varma]: exists only for the very rich.
[Amit Varma]: It simply does not exist for most of the people.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, I'd you know, Madhav, I disagree with your terming it a breakdown of the rule
[Amit Varma]: of law.
[Amit Varma]: I don't think the rule of law has actually existed in India at all, all through our independence.
[Amit Varma]: And these are marginalized groups who because they realize the lack of the existence of
[Amit Varma]: the rule of law, do not trust the police at all.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, when they believe these narratives, these paranoid narratives of child abductors
[Amit Varma]: or whatever the case may be, take matters into their own hand.
[Amit Varma]: And even when the police actually come and they try to intervene, they'll beat up the
[Amit Varma]: police as we've seen in recent cases, they just don't care.
[Amit Varma]: So that's one aspect of the problem.
[Amit Varma]: And you would say that merely trying to apply the danda will make these guys more angry
[Amit Varma]: and will make matters worse.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, one way of doing it is through police outreach to them and making them trust
[Amit Varma]: the law again, which seems to require massive structural changes, and it almost sounds impossible.
[Amit Varma]: The other kind of violence, which is the lynchings per se, are very different in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: they are normally carried out by the dominant community, which, like you said, mostly in
[Amit Varma]: the cases that we've been seeing are upper caste Hindus who are beating up or killing
[Amit Varma]: Dalits or Muslims, they are against the other, they often have the tacit support of the police.
[Amit Varma]: If the rule of law exists, it exists in a perverse way that the legal machinery is on
[Amit Varma]: their side.
[Amit Varma]: And it is, again, it is against the other, but it's driven, it seems to me, largely by
[Amit Varma]: tribalism, which I would argue is inherent in humans, but amplified by social media.
[Amit Varma]: So A, do you, are these characterizations accurate?
[Amit Varma]: And B, what are the different kinds of ways in which, as policy people, you would set
[Amit Varma]: out to deal with them?
[Guest 1]: I would sort of maybe dispute a little bit with the characterization of the second kind.
[Guest 1]: I'd say the sort of defining characteristic, I think Alok alluded to it earlier, is one
[Guest 1]: that is inherently political.
[Guest 1]: I think there is a question of some political purpose or political structure that is sought
[Guest 1]: to be achieved or protected in some way.
[Guest 1]: And that is sort of, I think, one of the defining characteristics of the lynching kinds of violence.
[Amit Varma]: And like, for example, like, what kind of, can you illustrate that?
[Amit Varma]: Like, is it that the dominant groups want more state patronage and they want to cut
[Guest 2]: off the others?
[Guest 2]: Consider this, you know, like, for instance, go back to the 2014 campaign.
[Guest 2]: We were all hearing Ache Din, but there was a threat to the campaign that we in the TV
[Guest 2]: didn't hear it.
[Guest 2]: But if you heard Modi's speeches, there was a whole, oh, look at what the UPA government
[Guest 2]: did with the pink revolution, which was clearly targeted at the fact that India's meat exports
[Guest 2]: had increased, right?
[Guest 2]: And that was coded message saying that, look, these guys have benefited at your expense.
[Guest 2]: These guys being the Muslim communities benefited, these butcher communities have benefited at
[Guest 2]: your expense, right?
[Guest 2]: Which is clearly to pit one community against the other.
[Guest 2]: It put them at a very socioeconomic status to say that they are benefiting and you're
[Guest 2]: not.
[Guest 2]: How unfair is that?
[Guest 2]: Right?
[Guest 2]: It may not have anything to do directly at the ground level, right?
[Guest 2]: You may measure the GDP and say, no, actually, Muslims are still not as well off as equivalent
[Guest 2]: in the communities.
[Guest 2]: But that message struck, right?
[Guest 2]: That message struck.
[Guest 2]: And that was used later on to push that narrative of, you know, and of course, you pass the
[Guest 2]: laws.
[Guest 2]: But the other element here is something that the Supreme Court totally misses out is the
[Guest 2]: fact that you've passed the laws legitimizing the notion that even possessing beef is somehow
[Guest 2]: illegal and unfair.
[Guest 2]: So all those laws, Supreme Court has made no mention of.
[Guest 2]: Supreme Court has, again, not even acknowledged its own role in weakening the Atrocities Act,
[Guest 2]: which makes it more difficult to prosecute people who attack the Dalits for being Dalits.
[Guest 2]: So you have all of these things which sort of aggravate existing social inequalities,
[Guest 2]: disparities, to specifically say, the government is on the side of this community, the government
[Guest 2]: is going to support you against the rest of the people.
[Guest 2]: And that is to sort of give you the impression that when you take things in your own hands,
[Guest 2]: we are there to have your backs, we are there to protect you.
[Guest 2]: So it makes a difference that when, say, an FIR is filed, saying that this person was
[Guest 2]: killed, a counter-FIR is filed, which says, actually, no, this person was carrying beef.
[Amit Varma]: Right, right.
[Amit Varma]: And it's almost as if the second one is a greater crime.
[Guest 2]: The second one is a greater crime.
[Guest 2]: Because why?
[Guest 2]: There's a legal framework, which sort of was passed by the people in power to protect you
[Guest 2]: in case you do something like this.
[Guest 2]: So there is a political gain, which is to be made by sort of pitting that one community
[Guest 2]: against the other.
[Amit Varma]: So something I'm fond of quoting is something the late Andrew Breitbart once said, politics
[Amit Varma]: is downstream of culture.
[Amit Varma]: And I would hold it before you had this communal Hindu versus Muslim politics, you had that
[Amit Varma]: animosity actually embedded in the culture, that, you know, this is not something new.
[Amit Varma]: You'll see this right from the time the Jan Sangh was formed as a political formulation,
[Amit Varma]: for example.
[Amit Varma]: They've consistently over the years got that 15-16% of the vote or whatever it is.
[Amit Varma]: And these ideas, these thoughts, this tribalism was in the culture, and it's only been amplified
[Amit Varma]: now.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, one theory is that it's social media has helped to amplify it because, you
[Amit Varma]: know, you have what is called preference cascades, people sort of discover there are so many
[Amit Varma]: others like them, what I call invisible bigots, and, and they all come out of the cupboard
[Amit Varma]: and then that's a consolidation there.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm not quite sure about the formulation that this is, you know, it's purely political,
[Amit Varma]: but leave that aside.
[Guest 1]: I mean, that's, that's, it's no, I would, I wouldn't say this purely political.
[Guest 1]: I just meant that it's one of its defining characteristics is that there is some political
[Guest 1]: purpose that is sort of at the root of the violence, right?
[Guest 1]: So whether it is preventing inter-caste marriages, or sort of the whole beef sort of issue and
[Guest 1]: everything that has happened around that, it's, there is some political motive behind
[Guest 1]: it.
[Guest 1]: And also not just political, there is some level of calculation.
[Guest 1]: This may not necessarily be premeditated, though that is often the case, but certainly
[Guest 1]: afterwards statements and actions made by whether it's people in power or just the leaders
[Guest 1]: of that organization, calculated to continue the legitimacy of those actions.
[Guest 1]: With the second kind of violence, I'm not saying it's completely apolitical, that's
[Guest 1]: what I'm saying, but it's more the outcome of political negligence.
[Guest 1]: So I would say maybe that I have, I frequently like to say, sort of treat the disease, not
[Guest 1]: the symptom, which the Supreme Court judgment just does not do, it only treats the symptoms.
[Guest 1]: So I'd say with the first example of the lynchings, the disease itself is political in nature,
[Guest 1]: and as well as the symptoms, but with the second, it's just the disease, the symptoms
[Guest 1]: itself in terms of the actual outbreak of violence, that is not really political.
[Guest 1]: It's just about because that community for a long period of time, I don't know how clear
[Guest 1]: this distinction has come out, but because that community for a very long time has been
[Guest 1]: politically neglected in some way, that they are sort of driven to this edge.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Guest 1]: So it is their absence within the political system, it is a marginalization from the political
[Guest 1]: system, which is causing.
[Guest 1]: And this is something that is, again, I sound like I'm being paid by some ESIM psychologists,
[Guest 1]: but this is something that is borne out in empirical evidence of, say, riots.
[Guest 1]: And also, they've gone through some of the previous studies that proved slightly more
[Guest 1]: Alportian or Le Bon sort of theories of crowd psychology and run them through their models
[Guest 1]: and have come out with results that prove their model and show that the other ones are
[Guest 1]: empirically unsound.
[Guest 1]: And basically show that, say, I think with the Tottenham riots in London, it was about
[Guest 1]: the persecution of Mark Duggan, I forget his name, but this is one individual who died
[Guest 1]: during an arrest.
[Guest 1]: And the community viewed that effectively like an assassination.
[Guest 1]: And that was because of a long history of marginalization and just being persecuted,
[Guest 1]: if not prosecuted.
[Guest 1]: So, yeah, it does stem from a long history of demarginalization.
[Amit Varma]: So, let me throw this question to you.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, we started by discussing the Supreme Court judgment and you guys explained how
[Amit Varma]: it's so fundamentally flawed.
[Amit Varma]: And we've also sort of spoken about how these two kinds of violence are fundamentally different
[Amit Varma]: and need to be dealt with differently.
[Amit Varma]: Let's say that you are the Supreme Court, the two of you are the Supreme Court bench,
[Amit Varma]: and you have to come up with a judgment that obviously won't make these mistakes.
[Amit Varma]: What would be the broad contours of that judgment then?
[Guest 2]: What would you say?
[Guest 2]: See, one thing would be to identify that firstly, there is a legal framework, which is sort
[Guest 2]: of encouraging and promoting these kinds of activities.
[Amit Varma]: I think that has to be attacked first.
[Amit Varma]: What is that framework?
[Amit Varma]: And what are we referring to?
[Guest 2]: So we're talking about all these beef ban laws, right?
[Guest 2]: We're talking about laws which sort of essentially say that my sentiments are more important
[Guest 2]: than actual livelihoods.
[Guest 2]: That you have state level laws, which sort of say that, I mean, the least harmful ones
[Guest 2]: of these are the ones that say sale of meat is banned for eight or nine days, all the
[Guest 2]: way to the Maharashtra law and the Uttar Pradesh law, which sort of say that even possession
[Guest 2]: of beef can land you in jail for eight or ten years.
[Amit Varma]: Are these unconstitutional laws?
[Guest 1]: I would say these are totally unconstitutional.
[Guest 1]: Possession has been overturned.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, but that is only by the Bombay High Court, for the Maharashtra laws.
[Guest 2]: The appeals for them are pending in the Supreme Court.
[Guest 2]: They've been pending since 2016.
[Guest 2]: They haven't been heard yet.
[Guest 2]: They should have been heard by now.
[Guest 2]: They should have been heard and decided by now.
[Guest 2]: Because the Supreme Court in the Puttaswamy case very clearly said, there's a right to
[Guest 2]: eat what you want.
[Guest 2]: There's a right to all of that.
[Guest 2]: But as quickly as it listed and heard, say, I mean, the hearings are going on right now,
[Guest 2]: the Section 377 case, I think this was just as important.
[Guest 2]: The court should have taken this up and said, OK, we can't separate these two issues.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: We understand that somebody has filed a PIL for lynching, but I think we can't separate
[Guest 2]: the issue.
[Guest 2]: I think administratively and also judicially, the two issues should have been heard together.
[Guest 2]: To have said that, it's not as if these people are suddenly gathering together and, you know,
[Guest 2]: killing Muslims or whatever for fun.
[Guest 2]: They're doing this because there's a certain legal regime which sort of tells them that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, beef is a problem.
[Amit Varma]: So the first part of your judgment of the Supreme Court, which the bench of Alok and
[Amit Varma]: Madhav would come up with, is change the legal framework by declaring all these laws unconstitutional.
[Guest 2]: Yes, absolutely.
[Guest 2]: It would it would sort of make this thing to, of course, our constitution has provisions
[Guest 2]: relating to, you know, you should try and reduce cow slaughter and say, OK, fine, we'll
[Guest 2]: give it a de minimis thing to say, yes, you can promote safe animal husbandry by reducing
[Guest 2]: the need for cow slaughter, but we will not criminalize possession.
[Guest 2]: We will allow, say, slaughter of buffaloes and old cattle and so on and so forth.
[Guest 2]: So we will take it back to the old 50s position, which drew a sensible balance between these
[Guest 2]: two considerations.
[Guest 2]: That would be the start.
[Guest 2]: The second would be to hold the state government responsible, to say the state government is
[Guest 2]: going to be responsible for the killings, not just the police.
[Guest 2]: And that would be in terms of saying, if you make a statement, you will be treated as an
[Guest 2]: accused.
[Guest 2]: If it is a post facto statement expressing support for the accused, you can be added
[Guest 2]: as an accused.
[Guest 2]: The state government has to come forth and sort of basically say that, yes, we will not
[Guest 2]: be saying a word in favor of the accused, that, you know, it doesn't matter if it's
[Guest 2]: the chief minister.
[Guest 2]: It has to either you shut up and say nothing or you say, we will let the criminal justice
[Guest 2]: system take its course forward.
[Guest 2]: Let the case continue forward.
[Guest 2]: Don't try to do something as silly as what happened in Jharkhand, where they were so,
[Guest 2]: oh, no, we have to show everyone how amazing our judicial system is.
[Guest 2]: We will carry out a botched trial.
[Guest 2]: You can't repair the judicial system just for this one category of cases.
[Guest 2]: Let it happen as it is intended to happen.
[Guest 2]: You also have to take into account that maybe it is not possible for these trials to take
[Guest 2]: place in that state.
[Guest 2]: The Supreme Court has to then say that if any party comes to us saying that the police
[Guest 2]: is prejudiced against us, we will immediately transfer it out of that state, preferably
[Guest 2]: to a state where that particular party is not the ruling party.
[Guest 2]: But then who will conduct the prosecution because the police is part of that.
[Guest 2]: Yeah.
[Guest 2]: So, which is which is why.
[Guest 2]: So, for instance, the most recent example, for instance, in the Khatwa rape case, where
[Guest 2]: they transferred it out of Jammu and Kashmir to Chandigarh, I mean, the investigation was
[Guest 2]: complete.
[Guest 2]: This is the prosecution will now be conducted by the government authorities in Chandigarh.
[Guest 2]: For instance, in the Gujarat riots case, they transferred it from Gujarat to Maharashtra,
[Guest 2]: where the prosecutors from Maharashtra did it.
[Guest 2]: So they can appoint I mean, the Supreme Court can say the problem is with the investigation
[Guest 2]: itself.
[Guest 2]: We will appoint we will handpick a set of investigation police officers whom we feel
[Guest 2]: can carry out a set of independent investigations in these kind of cases.
[Guest 2]: And all such incidents will be investigated only by these authorities, irrespective of
[Amit Varma]: the state.
[Amit Varma]: Some could argue that it's overreach on the part of the court, right?
[Guest 2]: It's meddling with what should really be an executive.
[Guest 2]: It is.
[Guest 2]: That is true.
[Guest 2]: But in a sense, when the executive itself is part of the offense, right, we are talking
[Guest 2]: about a situation like as with the Gujarat riots, as with the whole as with, for instance,
[Guest 2]: the 1984 riots, the executive itself is seen to be aiding and abetting the offense.
[Guest 2]: That is the part of the court has totally missed in the judgment.
[Guest 2]: It's not as if these are happening, despite the best efforts of somebody in the government
[Guest 2]: to stop it, or the government just doesn't have the capacity to stop it.
[Guest 2]: There is a level of aid and abetment that is happening.
[Guest 2]: I mean, you are having, as I pointed out earlier, government ministers going and garlanding
[Guest 2]: people who got this thing, you having accused who died, who being given the national flag
[Guest 2]: and so on.
[Guest 2]: So these are obvious signals being sent out, right?
[Guest 2]: Saying that we know who, I mean, this is whose side we are on in this matter.
[Guest 2]: So this is why context matters for a lynching.
[Guest 2]: This is why context matters.
[Guest 2]: These are not entirely a historical, these are not entirely a contextual killings.
[Guest 2]: So which is why the court should have understood that these are usually killings where the
[Guest 2]: government is in favor of one party over the other.
[Guest 2]: So, you know, say that in such killings, we will transfer it out of one state to the other.
[Guest 2]: Give us a list of such cases where you think the government has not done a good job.
[Guest 2]: Okay.
[Guest 2]: Jharkhand, they did a bad job of it.
[Guest 2]: They could have done better.
[Guest 2]: But where the state is just not moving ahead with the prosecution, where the state has
[Guest 2]: filed cases against the victims, you know, give us a list of those.
[Guest 2]: We transfer it out of those states, from Uttar Pradesh, we'll transfer it to maybe, I don't
[Guest 2]: know, Delhi, which is not ruled by the BJP, for instance, or transfer it from Gujarat
[Guest 2]: to some other state, something like that, you know, give us a list of this, we're happy
[Guest 2]: to do it.
[Guest 2]: The thing is, these are all powers the court legitimately enjoys under the constitution.
[Guest 2]: For precisely this reason, the court doesn't have to manually oversee the investigation.
[Guest 2]: They just need to ensure the process takes place in a manner which inspires confidence.
[Amit Varma]: So the court has a power according to the constitution that if they feel that a particular
[Amit Varma]: party cannot prosecute or decide on a case well enough, they can transfer it anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: And they can even, for example, say that if the case is in a BJP state, they can transfer
[Amit Varma]: it to a non-BJP state and take that political consideration into account.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, I mean, they don't expressly say this, but they have done this in the past without
[Guest 2]: saying it in so many words, they've done this in the past.
[Guest 2]: For instance, Jayalalitha's case was moved out of Tamil Nadu to Karnataka, simply to
[Guest 2]: keep, I mean, not because shift from AIDMK to DMK, but they recognize that because it
[Guest 2]: referred to the supremo of AIDMK, there is no chance of fair trial at all in the state.
[Guest 2]: That whichever party is there, they would interfere with the trial.
[Guest 2]: So they moved the whole trial to Karnataka.
[Guest 2]: So which is why they do have this power.
[Guest 2]: They should have understood that this is what is actually going on and they have failed
[Guest 2]: to do so.
[Guest 2]: So I think there was a lot of scope for this court to have done.
[Guest 1]: But meaning this is also not surprising because frequently sort of one of the truisms that
[Guest 1]: I keep on returning to as a lawyer sort of interest to working in the public policy space
[Guest 1]: is the justice must not only be done, but seen to be done.
[Guest 1]: And our current chief justice has shown his almost willful disregard of this concept in
[Guest 1]: sort of some of the sort of actions and positions that he has taken.
[Amit Varma]: So can you briefly summarize that for those of my listeners who may not have been following
[Amit Varma]: legal developments?
[Guest 1]: Well, I think the better person to describe that may be Alok, because he is one of the
[Guest 2]: participants, I think in that.
[Guest 2]: Working backwards, apart from this case, just in terms of how cases have been heard in the
[Guest 2]: Supreme Court, where you want to ensure fairness in the procedure, where you want cases to
[Guest 2]: be heard by judges without any conflict of interest, that has not happened.
[Guest 2]: Even cases relating to himself, Chief Justice Deepak Mishra has heard it himself by considering
[Guest 2]: allegations against him.
[Guest 2]: Where in terms of Judge Lohia case, where people want to know what happened, the judgment
[Guest 2]: not he didn't author it, but the bench that he was part of basically said nobody needs
[Guest 2]: to know anything, right?
[Guest 2]: Some people have given statements, that's it.
[Guest 2]: Be happy with it.
[Guest 2]: Nobody needs to ask any further questions.
[Guest 2]: That's the second instance that I can think of.
[Guest 2]: The fact is, even for instance, I can give an current example with the section 377 case,
[Guest 2]: there are actually two cases.
[Guest 2]: So one case is the writ petitions filed by Navtej Johar and a few others, which was challenging
[Guest 2]: 377 directly in the Supreme Court.
[Guest 2]: The second set of cases are actually a continuation of the old Kaushal cases, which sort of questioned
[Guest 2]: the correctness of Justice Singhvi's judgment, which brought back 377 into the picture.
[Guest 2]: Those have not been listed.
[Guest 2]: Those have not been listed because according to the Supreme Court's own rules, if those
[Guest 2]: were listed, Justice Deepak Mishra would have had to involve the three other senior judges
[Guest 2]: of the Supreme Court of India.
[Guest 2]: He did not want to do that.
[Guest 2]: He did not want to sit on the same bench as the three other judges who went on a press
[Amit Varma]: conference against him.
[Amit Varma]: So you have this kind of petty politics in the, you know, the highest institution of
[Amit Varma]: the land almost, which makes you wonder that even if the, you know, even if the Supreme
[Amit Varma]: Court, say, tries to correct the executive, who's going to watch the watchman?
[Guest 2]: Exactly.
[Guest 2]: Which creates this kind of a situation.
[Guest 2]: But yeah, I mean, the point, of course, being that at the end of the day, the Supreme Court
[Guest 2]: had a chance to ensure that justice was seen to be done here in this case.
[Guest 2]: And they've once again, gloriously blown it.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, I'd like to add one dissenting opinion to what Alok said.
[Guest 1]: It was a minor point where he said, even if the politicians don't say anything, I don't
[Guest 1]: subscribe to that, meaning maybe they shouldn't be held liable.
[Guest 1]: But I think it has been pointed out sufficiently online, at least about the silence of our
[Guest 1]: Honorable Prime Minister on some of these issues.
[Guest 1]: And as the sort of icon of his party and perhaps this current movement, his silence is as damning
[Guest 1]: as any of the inflammatory statements that have been made by maybe slightly more minor
[Amit Varma]: players.
[Amit Varma]: I absolutely agree.
[Amit Varma]: And also, on the campaign trail, he's been incredibly skilled with dog whistles.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, what will simply happen if you do have the Supreme Court saying that his
[Amit Varma]: state government should not say anything in their favor, is that while ministers themselves
[Amit Varma]: may not say anything, you'll have random party people saying things and, you know, freedom
[Amit Varma]: of speech, of course, they can, I mean, we support the right to do so.
[Amit Varma]: So I'd like to sort of, you know, wind it up by asking you guys a couple of questions
[Amit Varma]: that I ask all my guests on whatever subjects they're talking about.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll start with you, Alok, two questions each, which is what makes you hopeful?
[Amit Varma]: And what makes you despair about what is happening in this country with regard to mob violence?
[Amit Varma]: And I mean, both these kind of crowd violence, lynchings and the killings?
[Guest 2]: What makes me hopeful is the fact that perversely, I mean, of all the people to have responded,
[Guest 2]: the first and perhaps the most effective response might have been WhatsApps, even though they
[Guest 2]: may have about a 5 or 10% responsibility, not to say they're totally not responsible,
[Guest 2]: but 5 or 10% responsibility, their response, I think, one, they tried to fix their platform,
[Guest 2]: there's an ongoing response.
[Guest 2]: Two, they have called for people to submit proposals to carry out research.
[Guest 2]: I think, ideally, in an ideal situation should have been the government of India or some
[Guest 2]: executive agency which says, we want to commission studies to find out what is going on, find
[Guest 2]: government moves slowly, WhatsApp moves quicker, good for them.
[Guest 2]: But I think the fact that people are not sort of keeping quiet and saying, okay, we'll fix
[Guest 2]: these two, three things, and maybe the problem will go away.
[Guest 2]: I think it's a good thing.
[Guest 2]: And I think if some of the good research organizations that this country has sort of take up this
[Guest 2]: challenge seriously, and I know there are many who will go down to this to the ground
[Guest 2]: and not just research, even media organizations, I think what this really calls for some of
[Guest 2]: the kind of on the ground reporting that any number of solid reporters in this country
[Guest 2]: can do.
[Guest 2]: If we can get 10 good on the ground, long form pieces, which sort of say this is what
[Guest 2]: happened on that day, when this person accidentally found themselves in the middle of a mob which
[Guest 2]: thought they were a child lifter, I think we will get an incredible insight into what
[Guest 2]: is actually going on in this process.
[Guest 2]: So I think understanding what is going on will help us go there.
[Guest 2]: That at least makes me more helpful.
[Guest 2]: The fact that there is an interest and there is that capacity to find out what is going
[Guest 2]: on, I think that gives me hope.
[Guest 2]: What makes me despair, of course, is that, again, in terms of the fact that the Supreme
[Guest 2]: Judicial Body with all its level of protections, with all its judges is uninterested in saying
[Guest 2]: what it should have said, you know, that that is what dispairs me that you had this opportunity
[Guest 2]: to say something, even if the directions missed their mark, right, okay, I'm not saying that
[Guest 2]: this court should have has the opportunity to think through things maybe as deeply as
[Guest 2]: some of us may have.
[Guest 2]: But even if you had said, framed the issue in the way it ought to have been framed, I
[Guest 2]: think that would have been and even that signaling would have been that signaling would have
[Guest 2]: been great to have said, we see that people are being killed over carrying beef, that
[Guest 2]: is offensive to the idea of India, we see that people are being killed for wearing jeans
[Guest 2]: just for being just for being Dalits who wear jeans, that's an offensive idea to the notion
[Guest 2]: of India being a republic, if they had said that in a judgment, right, I think that would
[Guest 2]: have itself sent out sufficient signal that they know what is happening, they may be powerless
[Guest 2]: to do something immediately about it, or their measures may have missed the mark a little
[Guest 2]: bit understandable, but that they didn't even name it, right, they didn't name what is happening.
[Amit Varma]: I think that is a cause for hope is really what civil society is doing.
[Amit Varma]: And your cause for despair is what the institutions and just protect us are, you know, how they
[Guest 1]: are mishandling their
[Guest 1]: And the most to just add a little more context to it, Alok was saying, if you actually go
[Guest 1]: through the judgment, it doesn't read like a judgment, it reads like the kind of lecture
[Guest 1]: a judge would give if he was invited to some event, it's completely devoid of any context.
[Guest 1]: And also, he like parrots these very slogany kind of phrases like the unity and diversity
[Guest 1]: and which he says at least like 20 times, and he doesn't say like, Dalits once.
[Guest 1]: So given that the sort of judgment is written in this very sloganeering kind of fashion,
[Guest 1]: which, to be fair, is also Deepak Mishra's writing style, the absence of like a clear
[Guest 1]: sort of denial or call to arms against this kind of behavior is even more stark.
[Amit Varma]: And would you like to share his reasons or like, what are your reasons for hope and despair?
[Guest 1]: If you have something to add?
[Guest 1]: Well, my reasons for hope are, I'm going to be a little more selfish in that we are currently
[Guest 1]: working on a project on this, hopefully that will have some
[Guest 1]: That's Takshashila and Vidhi.
[Guest 1]: So hopefully that will have some impact on the discourse.
[Guest 1]: The law is, I think, being a bit too ambitious.
[Guest 1]: And sort of my primary sort of pet peeve with this whole issue, which I haven't discussed
[Guest 1]: in detail so far is, and I've written an article about this in the Hindu, is that sort of organizations
[Guest 1]: which are otherwise formally or legally recognized can commit these acts, their members may get
[Guest 1]: arrested and get thrown under the bus, but the organizations go scot-free.
[Guest 1]: So I think in terms of signaling, if you can somehow even find, forget, I don't even want
[Guest 1]: to go into banning an organization because that's a problematic proposal constitutionally.
[Amit Varma]: Sardar Patel once did ban the RSS, leave that aside.
[Guest 1]: But it's much more liable to abuse.
[Guest 1]: Exactly.
[Guest 1]: I agree with that.
[Guest 1]: So I don't want to get into banning, but some kind of accountability to the organization,
[Guest 1]: some kind of group liability, I think needs, I think will go a long way, at least with
[Guest 1]: the sort of virtue signaling so that we can then at least go back to a narrative of bad
[Guest 1]: eggs as opposed to these large monolithic institutions that are behind these people's
[Guest 1]: backs.
[Guest 1]: So that is one area that sort of, I think, gives me cause for hope.
[Guest 1]: Cause for despair is pretty much everything else.
[Guest 1]: And you alluded to the current state of our criminal justice system, whether it's the
[Guest 1]: courts, the prosecution, the police.
[Guest 1]: It's one of the recommendations that Deepak Mishra gives is the, I think the favorite
[Guest 1]: for any criminal issue, which is them fast track courts.
[Guest 1]: In my brief one year of practicing, I visited the same fast track court six times for the
[Guest 1]: same matter.
[Guest 1]: And it was always the same stage because it was an appeal of awaiting records from the
[Guest 1]: lower court.
[Guest 1]: So this is the current state of fast track in our country.
[Guest 1]: It is a, well, it is, it does nothing.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe they should put a jogging track around the fast track courts, so at least it'll have
[Amit Varma]: some kind of fast track around it.
[Amit Varma]: I know that's a bad joke, but so is our system, right?
[Guest 1]: Absolutely.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, yeah.
[Guest 1]: Or maybe take a sort of a cue from Silicon Valley and maybe have a standing desk designed
[Guest 1]: to the courts.
[Guest 1]: But yeah, it, everything else pretty much is, I think you already said that a lot of
[Guest 1]: the things that we're talking about are predicated on having a criminal justice system that we
[Amit Varma]: simply do not have.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And on that note of despair, we hope you enjoyed listening to us, Alok and Madhav.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks so much for coming on the show.
[Guest 1]: Thanks for inviting us.
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: My pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, you can follow Madhav on Twitter at MadChap88.
[Amit Varma]: I think Alok is off Twitter at the moment, but you can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: And for past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen, just head on over to SeenUnseen.in.
[Unknown]: Every week comes a show where three people come together to tell you about stuff they
[Unknown]: like, a movie, a TV show, a book, and other stuff.
[Unknown]: Tune in every Monday on the IVM podcast app to IVM Likes.
[Unknown]: Batman approves this message.
[Unknown]: Thank you, Batman.
[Unknown]: Hi, I'm Vishal Gondal.
[Unknown]: I'm an entrepreneur.
[Unknown]: I've had the chance to meet and understand how some of the super achievers have hacked
[Unknown]: their way to success, and they have done spectacular innovations.
[Unknown]: Now I take a closer look at these people's lives to find out what lies beneath the force
[Unknown]: only on The Vishal Gondal Show.
[Unknown]: Episodes out fortnightly on Wednesdays on the IVM website, app, or your favorite podcasting
[Unknown]: platform.